Most of us experience combustion, a chemical process where a fuel combines with oxygen to produce heat and light, in the form of a fire where both the fuel and ignition source are well known.

In some circumstances, however, the trigger that ignited the fire is not a definite source, like a match, but a complicated, often hidden, process. Seeming to have sprung up spontaneously (hence the name), these fires are often the result of long-term chemical reactions.

Spontaneous Coal Combustion

According to a study supported by the CDC:

Spontaneous heating of coal occurs when sufficient oxygen is available to sustain the low temperature reaction of coal with oxygen but the heat produced by the coal oxidation is not adequately dissipated by conduction or convection.

This process begins a vicious cycle where the rate of oxidation increases as the temperature increases and vice versa, or in what the study authors call a “thermal runaway [where] a fire ensues.”

Relatively common, as of January 2013, over 200 coal fires were burning in the U.S. alone. These blazes are notoriously difficult to extinguish, and one coalmine fire that could have arisen from spontaneous combustion, the Centralia Mine Fire which ignited in 1962, still burns today.

Spontaneous Hay Combustion

Counter-intuitively, hay will spontaneously combust if it gets too wet. According to the Washington State University Extension:

Dry hay (stored at 15 percent moisture or less) is safe for long-term storage. However, if the hay has become wet the quality has been permanently changed and the potential fire hazard from spontaneous combustion increased.

How does this work? As the Extension experts note, this spontaneous heating is the result of biological and chemical forces:

The wet hay will first stimulate microbial growth and as these organisms grow they produce heat while drying out the surrounding surfaces of the hay for energy. More drying surfaces produces more microbial growth . . . . When the bale temperature reaches about 150F . . . heat resistant bacteria, called exothermic bacteria, start a process of chemical change that rapidly increases the temperatures to the point of spontaneous combustion.

Haystack fires are serious business. One large fire (cause unknown) in Yolo County, California burned for several days, and losses were “estimated at $2 million.”

Spontaneous Linseed Oil Combustion

A common household product, linseed oil is used to protect wood and clean tools. Typically, cloth rags are soaked in the oil in order to make application easier; however, when these rags are not properly stored:

Linseed oil evaporates very rapidly causing an exothermic reach, which accelerates as the temperature of the rags increases. When the accumulated heat exceeds the rate of heat dissipation, the temperature increases and may eventually become hot enough to cause the rags to spontaneously combust.

These fires have been known to cause tremendous damage. In 1991, one of the most devastating high rise fires in the United States, in which three firefighters died, was found to have been started when “workers left behind rags stained with linseed oil.”

Easily prevented, firefighters suggest “putting your used rags on a non flammable surface to dry, in an open area like your driveway. . . . Just lay them out flat . . . Once they are dry, you can clean them up.”

Spontaneous Human Combustion

In the typical case where spontaneous human combustion (SHC) is suspected, a body is found that appears to have been burned from the inside out; and, while there is tremendous burn damage to the person’s torso, her extremities (hands, feet and limbs), as well as her surroundings, are not touched by the fire.

Proponents of SHC will often point to any of several potential internal causes for the blaze. Methane in the intestines (think farts) is often suggested as a fuel source, and some believe naturally occurring enzymes could be the catalyst. Static electricity has also been named as a potential culprit.

These true believers point to stories like that of an Oklahoma man whose horribly burned body was found in his kitchen, surrounded by items and furniture that was not damaged. The 65-year-old victim was known to be a heavy smoker and drinker. Some proponents point out that alcohol is also flammable, but argue that its action had to be internal, or else other flammable items in the home would have burned.

Naysayers take this same evidence and use it to disprove the theory. They claim that these deaths occur because the human body has acted like “an inside-out candle:”

A candle is composed of a wick on the inside surrounded by a wax made of flammable fatty acids. The wax ignites the wick and keeps it burning. In the human body, the body fat acts as the flammable substance, and the victim’s clothing or hair acts as the wick. As the fat melts from the heat, it soaks into the clothing and acts as a wax-like substance to keep the wick burning slowly. Scientists say this is why victims’ bodies are destroyed yet their surroundings are barely burned.

So, regarding the Oklahoma man, naysayers would argue that he likely passed out, from drinking or otherwise, and a hot ash from his cigarette, or another external source, ignited the fire.  As fire tends to burn upwards, rather than out, as long as nothing extremely flammable is around the man, we simply have a human candle that burns away leaving surrounding areas seemingly untouched.

Recent scholarship appears to have discovered the fuel, if not the ignition mechanism. In a study performed by Cambridge research biologist, Brian J. Ford, it was determined that acetone, a naturally occurring substance in the body, could cause the injuries seen with suspected SHC victims.

Acetone is characterized by Prof. Ford as “one flammable constituent in the body that can greatly increase in concentration,” and this happens when a body is in a state of ketosis. Potential causes of ketosis include certain diets, diabetes, teething and even alcoholism. Regardless of its source, acetone is highly flammable.

In his experiment, Prof. Ford

Marinated pork tissue in acetone [then used it] to make scale models of humans, which we clothed and set alight. They burned to ash within half an hour

Ford concluded that “for the first time a feasible cause of human combustion has been experimentally demonstrated.”Today I found out why some countries drive on the right and some countries drive on the left.

The origin of this varies based on the time period and country, but primarily throughout history people used the “keep-left” rule.  It has only been very recently that the world has predominately switched to the “keep-right” rule.

The first real archaeological evidence of a keep-left or keep-right type rule for a road, originates in the Roman Empire, which shouldn’t be surprising as they built a lot of massive, well trafficked roads spanning Europe and thus would have needed to establish certain rules governing how people were to interact on the roads.   So which side did the Romans use?  Archaeological evidence suggests it was common for the Romans to drive on the left side of the road.  This was first discovered in 1998 where a Roman quarry in Swindon, England had grooves in the road going away from the quarry on the left side that were significantly deeper than those on the right, due to the added weight of the stone.   It is not precisely known why they would have chosen this side, but it is probably similar to one of the main reasons this practice continued into the middle ages.

During the middle ages the roads weren’t always very safe for travelers; meeting people coming the other way on the road was something best done defensively.  Historians then believe the keep-left rule was adopted because, on a horse, if you were right handed and you met some unsavory company on the road, you could draw your weapon, typically attached to your left side, with your right hand and bring it to bear quickly against the person who is going the opposite way of you on your right; all the while, controlling the reigns with your left hand.  Then of course, if you happened to meet a friend on the road, you could more easily offer your right hand in greeting without needing to reach across your body when on horseback.  People on horseback then also typically ruled the road, so everybody else followed suit.

This keep-left rule was so common that, in 1300 AD, Pope Boniface VIII decreed that all pilgrims headed to Rome from wherever they were coming from should abide by the keep-left rule of the road along their journey.  This then held across most of the Western World until the late 1700s.

What ended up happening to force the switch in the 18th century were teamsters in the United States, who would drive large wagons with a team of horses, as the name implies.  These wagons tended to dominate the road and force everybody else to abide by the rule of the road they were using.  Very importantly, in many of those old, large American wagons, they did not include a seat on the wagon for the driver.  Rather, the driver would typically sit on the rear left most horse, when the driver was right handed.  This allowed them to easily drive a whole team of horses with a lash in their right hand.

This then forced the issue of having oncoming traffic on your left as the drivers would want to make sure any part of their team or wagon didn’t collide with oncoming traffic.  When sitting on the rear left most horse, this was much easier to do when using a keep-right rule of the road.  Just as important, if you wanted to pass a wagon in front of you, or at least see further down the road when you are sitting on the left side, it is much easier done if you are using the keep-right rule; this would give you much greater visibility of oncoming traffic when sitting on the left of your wagon.  Gradually, this system spread so that by the late 18th century, the first laws in the United States were passed, starting in 1792 in Pennsylvania, where the rule of the road was now officially a keep-right rule.  This quickly spread throughout the United States and Canada.

So how did this spread through Europe?  It started with France.  The reasons why the French switched to a keep-right rule instead of the traditional keep-left rule aren’t completely clear.  Some say it is because the French Revolutionists didn’t want anything to do with anything that had ever been Pope decreed.  Others say it was because they didn’t want to use the same rule of the road the English used.  Still others say it was entirely Napoleon’s doing.  The reasons why he may have done this, if that is the case, are even murkier ground.  Whatever the case, France switched to the keep-right system.  Napoleon then spread this system throughout the countries he conquered.  Even after he was defeated, most of the countries he had conquered chose to continue with the keep-right system.  The most important of these countries, as far as eventually further spreading the keep right system, was Germany.  Fast forward to the 20th century and, as Germany conquered countries in Europe, they forced their keep-right system onto those countries.

England never adopted this method primarily because massive wagons, as became common in the United States, didn’t work well on narrow streets which were common in London and other English cities.  England was also never conquered by Napoleon or later Germany.  Thus, they kept the classical keep-left rule of the road that had endured for hundreds of years before.   By 1756, this was actually made an official law in Britain.  As the British Empire expanded, this keep-left rule, as a law, spread throughout the world.  This hasn’t endured in most of the former British ruled countries, primarily thanks to Germany and the growing popularity of the keep-right system.  There are still a few though, probably the largest of which, by population, is India.